Manegirial communication:

Communication means to create a common understanding. Communication is an important aspect of human behavior. It stands for natural activity of all human beings to convey opinions, feelings, information, and ideas to others through words (written or spoken), body language, or signs.
Communication is effective when it produces the desired action in the reader or audi- ence. Effective communication means the message is understood and acted upon, and not merely sent to the recipient. 
Purpose of communication:

	1	To inform
	2	To persuade
	3	To mobilize

Cycle of otherization —— This happens cause people are bias. — The  cycle of otherization starts with 
	1	Harmless bias.
	2	Harmful bias
	3	Stereo type
	4	Using culturist language - Using slang to pronounce someone.
	5	Ethnocentric - Solution for such situation is stop communication.

Two type of bias - 

	1	Positive bias
	2	Negative bias

Ego state:
It represents a person’s way of thinking, feeling and behaving.  They are related to behaviour of a person and not his age. However, they are present in every person in varying degrees. There may be more of one ego state than another at a specific point of time. When two persons communicate with each other, communication is affected by their ego states. 
The Parent State 
The parent state is produced by the “playback” of recordings in the brain of imposed external events perceived by the person before one’s complete understanding of one’s surroundings. 

The Child State 
The child state is the response to sensory experiences. These are usually in the form of feelings like wonder, fear, exclamation, surprise, glee, and so on. They are attitudes and behavioural patterns based on impulses and feelings that one experiences as a child. 

The Adult State 
The adult state develops after the child state and the parent state. The adult state helps in retrospection, construction of reality, analysis, and feedback. Thus, only those taught-concepts and felt-concepts are accepted that are applicable and appropriate to the present situation. The adult state allows the child or parent to validate external as well as internal data. 

Learning to give a powerful speech:
	Think about speech (mind) — have confidence(body) — try to influence others

Designing arguments:
	1. dispositio - arrangement of my thoughts
	2. Exordium - introduction
	3. narratio - context or situation
	4. refutatio - counter arguments
	5. peroratio - conclusion

The thesis - Putting your ideas into words.
Western philosophy - conclusion first then give the deductive reasoning. Indian philosophy is opposite to this.

1. Legos: Appeal tp reason
	inductive arguments - forming generalisation from given evidence
	deductive reasoning - forming conclusion from generalisation 

What constitute in legos? - Data backing any type of reasoning.

2. Ethos - 2nd artistic mode of appeal
	Establishing credibility with your work
Ex - telling someone that you have 10yrs of experience for some field, this way one can establish Ethos.

How to improve ethos? - 
	1. Establishing authority
	2. Trust worthiness and respect
	3. Similarity to the audience
	4. Expertise and reputation

3. Pathos - Appeal to audience emotion
	1. Understanding other’s point of view
	2. Accepting other’s point of view
	3. Acting on their req
	4. Bond with audience with emotion.


 Persuasion:
When leader think about team/org first. For persuasion preparation should reflect in your thoughts.

Influence strategy:
1. Position
2. Expert
3. Reputation
4. Reward power
5. Connection power
6. Empathy power
7. Bargaining power - Negotiation 

Persuasion strategy:
1. Scarcity
2. Social proof
3. Reciprocity
4. Liking

Conflict strategy:
1. Avoidance
2. Accommodation
3. Collaboration
4. Compromising
5. Competing










